{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 RYO_Serif;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.22000}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\f0\fs22\lang2057 ------\par
\par
\ul\b Non-Neutral Operations\ulnone\b0\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 Audio Fact Sheet p.782)\i0\par
\par
34.3.8 \b Clip fades\b0\par
When [Create Fades] on [Clip Edges] is enabled in the [Record/Warp/Launch Preferences], a short (up to 4 ms) fade is applied to the clip start and end to avoid clicks at the clip edges. These 'de-clicking' fades can also be applied to [Session View] clips via the [Clip Fade]  button. Additionally, [Arrangement View] clips have editable fades and crossfades. Applying any of these fade options is a non-neutral operation\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 Audio Fact Sheet p.783)\par
\i0 34.3.9 \b Panning\b0\par
Live uses constant power panning with sinusoidal gain curves. Output is 0 dB at the center position and signals panned fully left or right will be increased by +3 dB. In order to minimize this volume change, it may be helpful to narrow the overall stereo width before doing extreme pan\'02ning. This can be done via the [Width] control in the [Utility] device.\par
\par
34.3.10 \b Grooves\b0\par
Under most conditions, playback of a warped clip that is at the same tempo as the [Set] is a neutral operation. However, if a groove  is applied, playback will be non-neutral at any tempo.\par
\par
\i\par
\ul\b\i0 Preset secrets!\par
\ulnone\b0\i\par
(quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Working with Instruments and Effects p.286)\i0\par
You can create multiple slicing presets and choose between them in the Slicing Preset chooser in the slicing dialog.\par
\par
To create default presets for converting Drums, Harmony, or Melody to MIDI: \par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Converting Audio to MIDI p.204)\i0\par
Live uses the transient markers in the original audio clip to determine the divisions between notes in the converted MIDI clip. This means that you can 'tune' the results of the conversion by adding, moving, or deleting transient markers in the audio clip before running any of the Convert commands.\par
\par
Although each of the commands has been designed for a particular type of musical material, you can sometimes get very interesting results by applying the 'wrong' command. For example, Convert Harmony will usually create chords. So running it on a monophonic clip (like a vocal recording) will often generate notes that weren't present in the original audio. This can be a great way to spark your creativity.\par
\par
In addition to these 'master' default presets, you can also create default presets that are specific to only one Project.\par
\par
\par
------\par
------\par
\par
\par
\ul\b I/O and Routing Secrets!\par
\ulnone\b0\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Routing and I/O p.229)\par
\i0 15.5 \b Internal Routings\b0\par
Live's mixer and external routing devices allow for inter-track routings. These routings, albeit potentially confusing, enable many valuable creative and technical options. Via the mixer, inter\'02track routing can work two ways:\par
\par
\b 1.\b0  \ul Track A \ulnone is set up to \ul send\ulnone  its output signal to \ul Track B\ulnone . This is possible because every track that can receive an output signal of the appropriate type from Track A shows up in its [Output Type] chooser.\par
\par
\b 2.\b0  \ul Track B \ulnone is set up to \ul receive\ulnone  its input signal from \ul Track A\ulnone . This works because every track that delivers a signal of the appropriate type appears in Track B's [Input Type] chooser.\par
\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Routing and I/O p.230)\par
\i0 Both approaches result in Track A's output being fed into Track B. \par
\par
\b Approach 1\b0  leaves Track B's in/out settings alone, and we can, at any time, add more tracks that feed their output into Track B. This is the method of choice for '\b many-to-one\b0 ' routings such as submixes or several MIDI tracks playing the same instrument.\par
In this scenario, soloing Track B will still allow you to hear the output of the tracks that are feeding it. Also, you can still solo Track A and hear its output signal. In this case, all other tracks are muted, including those that might also feed into Track B. Technically, what you hear is the output of Track B, with everything except Track A's signal removed.\par
\par
\b Approach 2\b0 , on the other hand, leaves Track A unaffected except for Track B tapping its output. We can easily add more tracks like Track B that all tap Track A's output. Instrument layering is a good example of such a \b 'one-to-many\b0 ' routing setup.\par
\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Routing and I/O p.229)\i0\par
The 'Resampling' option in any audio track's [Input Type] chooser will route the Master output to that track. You can then decide on what exactly you will be resampling and mute, solo or other\'02wise adjust the tracks that are feeding the Master output. You will probably want to use the [Master Volume] meter to make sure that your level is as high as possible without clipping (indicated by red in the meter). Then you can arm the track and record into any of its empty clip slots. \par
\b\i Note:\b0  the recording track's own output will be suppressed while resampling is taking place, and will not be included in the recording.\i0\par
Samples created by resampling will be stored in with the current Set's Project folder, under Samples/Recorded. Until the Set is saved, they remain at the location specified by the Temporary Folder.\par
\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Routing and I/O p. 232)\par
\i0 If a track has one or more [Instrument] or [Effect Racks] in its device chain, internal routing points (Pre FX, Post FX and Post Mixer) will also be available for every chain within the Rack. If a track contains one or more Drum Racks, internal routing points will be available for any of the Rack's return chains.\par
\par
\par
------\par
------\par
\par
\par
\ul\b The Groove Pool\b0\par
\ulnone\i\par
(quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Using Grooves p.207)\i0\par
The [Groove Pool]'s controls work as follows:\par
\par
\b [Timing]\b0  adjusts how much the groove pattern will affect any clips which are using it.\par
\b [Random]\b0  adjusts how much random timing fluctuation will be applied to clips using the selected groove. At low levels, this can be useful for adding subtle 'humanization' to highly quantized, electronic loops.\par
\b\i Note: \b0 [ Random] applies differing randomization to every \ul\b voice\ulnone\b0  in your clip, so notes that originally occurred together will now be randomly offset both from the grid and from each other.\par
(quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Using Grooves p.208)\i0\par
\b [Velocity]\b0  adjusts how much the velocity of the notes in clips will be affected by the velocity information stored in the groove file.\par
\b\i Note:\b0  this slider goes from -100 to +100. i.e. At negative values, the effect of the groove's velocity will be reversed; loud notes will play \par
quietly and vice versa.\i0\par
\b [Global Amount]\b0  this parameter scales the overall intensity of [Timing], [Random] and [Velocity] for all of the available groove files. At 100%, the parameters will be applied at their as\'02signed values. \par
\b Note:\b0  the [Amount] slider goes up to 130%, which allows for even more exaggerated groove effects. If grooves are applied to clips in your Set, the Global Amount slider will also appear in Live's [Control Bar].\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Using Grooves p.208)\i0\par
13.1.2 \b Committing Grooves\b0\par
Pressing the [Commit] button below the [Clip Groove] chooser 'writes' your groove parameters to the clip. For MIDI clips, this moves the notes accordingly. For audio clips, this creates [Warp Markers] at the appropriate positions in the clip.\par
After pressing Commit, the clip's [Groove] chooser selection is automatically set to [None]\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Using Grooves p.210)\i0\par
13.3.1 \b Grooving a Single Voice\b0\par
Drummers will often use variations in the timing of particular instruments in order to create a convincing beat. For example, playing hi-hats in time but placing snare hits slightly behind the beat is a \{classic\} way of creating a laid-back feel. But because groove files apply to an entire clip at once, this kind of subtlety can be difficult to achieve with a single clip.\par
Provided your clip uses a [Drum] or [Instrument Rack], one solution can be to extract the chain (page 319) containing the voice that you want to independently groove. In this example, we'd extract the snare chain, creating a new clip and track that contained only the snare notes. Then we could apply a different groove to this new clip.\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual)\par
\i0 13.3.2 \b Non-Destructive Quantization\b0\par
Grooves can be used to apply real-time, non-destructive quantization to clips. To do this, simply set the groove's [Timing],[Random] and [Velocity] amounts to 0% and adjust its [Quantize] and [Base] \par
parameters to taste. With only [Quantize] applied, the actual content of the groove is ignored, so this technique works the same regardless of which Groove file you use.\par
\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Using Grooves)\i0\par
13.3.3\b  Creating Texture With Randomization\b0\par
You can use a groove's [Random] parameter to create realistic doublings. This can be particu\'02larly useful when creating string textures from single voices. To do this, first duplicate the track \par
containing the clip that you want to 'thicken'. Then apply a groove to one of the clips and turn up its [Random] parameter. When you play the two clips together, each note will be slightly (and randomly) out of sync with its counterpart on the other track.\par
\par
\par
------\par
------\par
\par
\par
\ul\b Launching Clips or Follow Actions\ulnone\b0\par
\par
14.7.1 \b Looping Parts of a Clip\b0\par
Let's say that you want to play a longer clip, but then you want only the last eight bars to loop. \par
You can set this up using Follow Actions:\par
\b 1. \b0 Drag the clip into the [Arrangement View] and make sure that the [Clip View]'s Loop switch is \ul not\ulnone  activated. Use the [Edit] menu's [Split] command  to split the clip between the \par
non-looping and looping parts:\par
\par
In the [Arrangement View]:\par
Splitting Clips\par
The [Split] command can divide a clip or isolate part of it.\par
To split a clip in two halves, do the following:\par
\b i.\b0  Unfold the track;\par
\b ii.\b0  In the waveform or MIDI display, click at the position where you want the clip to be split;\par
\b iii.\b0  Execute the [Split] command.\par
\par
To isolate a part of a clip, do the following:\par
\b i.\b0  Unfold the track;\par
\b ii.\b0  In the waveform or MIDI display, drag a selection over the part of the clip you want to \par
isolate;\par
\b iii.\b0  Execute the [Split] command to divide the original clip into three pieces.\par
\par
\par
\b 2.\b0  Click and drag the resulting two clips into the [Session View] by letting the mouse cursor hover over the [Session View] selector. Drop the two clips into a track. They now form a [Follow Action] group.\par
\par
\b 3.\b0  Set up Follow Actions for the first clip. You will want to make [Follow Action Time] equal to the clip's length. Set the [Follow Action A] chooser to 'Next', with a [Chance] setting of 100%, and set [Follow Action B] to \f1 '\f0 No Action'. Now this clip is set up to advance to the looping clip after it plays.\par
\par
\b 4.\b0  Activate the [Loop] switch for the second clip.\par
The first clip will now proceed to the second after it has played in its entirety; the second clip will simply play in a loop until it is stopped.\par
\par
\par
------\par
------\par
\par
\par
\ul\b Computer Audio Resources and Strategies\par
\ulnone\b0\par
\i (quoting ableton live suite 11 Audio Fact Sheet p.783)\par
\i0 34.4 \b Tips for Achieving (and Abusing) Optimal Sound Quality in Live\par
\b0 *add* ?\par
\i\par
(quoting ableton live suite 11 user manual Working with Instruments and Effects p.281)\i0\par
Devices are turned on and off using their [Activator] switches. Turning a device off is like temporarily deleting it: The signal remains unprocessed, and the device does not consume CPU cycles. Live devices generally do not load down the CPU unless they are active.\par
\par
Note that no clipping can occur between devices because there is practically unlimited head\'02room. Clipping can occur when an overly strong signal is sent to a physical output or written to a \par
sample file.\par
\par
\b Strategies for Saving CPU Power\par
\b0 Real-time synthesis needs lots of computing power. However, there are strategies for reducing CPU load:\par
- When using warping, be aware that the Complex and Complex Pro modes use signifcantly more CPU power than the other Warp Modes.\par
- Turn off the any filters not needed.\par
- A filter's CPU cost correlates with the steepness of its slope - the 24 dB slope is more expensive than the 12 dB slope.\par
- Turn off any LFOs for a slightly positive influence on CPU.\par
- Stereo samples need significantly more CPU than mono samples, as they require twice the processing.\par
- Decrease the number of simultaneously allowed voices with the Voices control.\par
- Turn Spread to 0% if it is not needed.\par
- Any Interpolation and Antialias modes can also be turned off to conserve CPU resources.\par
\par
-----\par
new\par
In the Session View, it is possible to see each track's impact on the CPU load by clicking on the Show/Hide Performance Impact selector in the Mixer Section.\par
\par
In the Performance Impact section, each track has its own CPU meter with six rectangles that light up to indicate the relative impact of that track on the CPU level of the current Set. Freezing the track (see 'Track Freeze') with the largest impact or removing devices from that track will usually reduce the CPU load.\par
\par
\par
}
 